hello and welcome to the live stream let
me try and fix up the camera just a
little
and there we go okay so
today i've received lot of questions on
my patreon so thank you to the patreons
there's a few questions on twitter as
well and from various other places one
of the questions on patreon are in great
depth some of them are extremely long
but i owe my patreons something in
return for their great support so i'm
going to move through them one at a time
and spend some attention so i'll be
looking off into that direction where
there's another screen where i can read
what the patreon questions are so
without further ado
let me just get straight into it the
first one is from adil and adil says hi
brett
what do you think of the idea
by ian jarvi and joseph agassi
that making progress towards scientific
truth depends on seeking out the next
unrefuted explanation whereas making
progress towards technological
usefulness
depends on applying the best refuted
explanation
reason being it's not really possible to
understand the limits of an unrefuted
theory fully until it is later refuted
by an even better unrefuted explanation
so designing a technology and life
theories that remain unrefuted eg
quantum mechanics and relativity
may be unusually risky because we don't
yet understand what their true limits
edge cases are right
wrong now i don't agree with this i
think that our situation
is that
we have problems and when we encounter
problems we apply
the solution that
is going to best solve our problem
so
when it comes to
finding a technological solution
and requiring that we only use a
hitherto refuted solution
well i think that's just misguided i
don't think that's correct
and i don't think that's correct because
oh look at any example what is the gps
system based on the global positioning
system
although you in theory could probably
make a newtonian version of it
it relies upon our best unrefuted theory
of gravity
the theory of general relativity and so
that's just one example
many of the bits of technology that we
use rely upon our understanding of
quantum theory as well scanning
tunneling electron microscopes are one
the existence of the large hadron
collider
many of the things that exist inside of
hospitals that scan you and help doctors
to diagnose
you rely upon
unrefuted theories so
no i don't think that's quite right
we design technology and we
solve problems in the physical world
by falling back on uh whatever the
solution happens to be
uh let me just check to see if my audio
is working can anyone anyone in the chat
tell me if the audio is actually working
i can't quite tell myself yesterday in
fact i can see that it's not bear with
me
just
i can see people were saying it was
working
but is it working better now is the
question i had my well this microphone
turned off so presumably just the laptop
was picking up audio um wow
anyway continuing yeah so that that's
the answer to adil's question
um
i i know
i don't know personally i know of just
for gassy um i don't know him javi so i
don't i can't say whether or not
a deal is representing their argument
exactly
with fidelity
but
well
one one part of a deal's question says
the reason that we would use refuted
theories in order to create technology
rather than unrefuted theories is
because it's not really possible to
understand the limits of an unrefuted
theory
well
well it might not be possible to fully
understand the limits
in some sense of even the refuted theory
the refuted theory can reach into areas
that we don't fully understand either so
that's another thing but yes i think it
all just comes back to whatever your
problem situation happens to be
routinely we use i
just go back to of course the area i
know which is physics
so much of
our
technology if you like and that can
include our physical buildings relies
upon our understanding of classical
newtonian mechanics we don't need to go
into the details of quantum theory or
even the details of
physical chemistry as to how chemical
bonding works
in order to build a bridge sometimes we
might
but we can get by
by simply understanding things called
statics in something like civil
engineering
and although it's not a fundamental
theory it's a theory that will solve the
problem of building the bridge or
constructing the building
so
i suppose i would have to
understand precisely more details about
this particular argument because it
seems to me that on the face of it we
absolutely do
rely routinely quite often
on
as yet unrefuted theories namely the
best existing theory that we happen to
have at any given time
adele asks another question which is
when asking
what should i do next
does it all fundamentally come back to
choosing creating the best explanation
this is something i've been talking
about recently in many of my podcasts
the relationship between epistemology
and the chimera that is probability
a discussion of risk
and the thought about
how to make decisions and therefore
morality what we should do next
does it always fundamentally come back
to choosing or creating the best
explanation well i think it's quite
right there to have put
creating the best explanation there
because of course
we can't always when deciding what to do
next
choose the best explanation because we
might not have a best explanation we
might simply have no explanation at all
and if we're in the situation where we
have no explanation at all we're going
to have to rely upon our
creativity this doesn't necessarily mean
that our explanation in all cases is
going to be
a well-expressed explicit hard to very
good explanation
it can be an intuition
an intuition is just well this feels
like the best thing to do
you're walking down the street at night
and someone's walking towards you you
might have a bad feeling you don't have
a good explanation
that the person walking towards you is
hostile or a danger in any way you
simply have a feeling and intuition and
so the best choice is perhaps to avoid
the person or not it depends upon your
particular situation are you a big
strong person who understands martial
arts are you a much smaller person who's
a little bit fearful of walking around
at night in a dark part of the city
these are the kind of choices that
people make routinely every day and they
don't necessarily require
some best explanation
in the sense that
we can outline and write an essay
that accounts for everything that we're
doing
because so much of what we might do
is
couched in intuitions which are
inexplicit knowledge which including
explicit knowledge and so that's what i
would say about that
okay moving on
from david hearn a great friend of the
podcast
and as i've said before a great twitter
follow if you can find david on twitter
david hearn
david has curated
amongst his many likes
what's going on in science in very
diverse areas so rather than me
following lots of scientists i've said
this before i just followed david
because david follows all the good
scientists and when they tweet something
interesting he retweets it or likes it
and so i managed to keep up
that way
and he asked the question about taking
children seriously david's question is
how best to balance taking children
seriously and allowing people
less than 16
to have drugs or surgical procedures
even if dangerous
okay
my understanding of taking children
seriously is that the only reason that
the word children appears in the
philosophy at all is because
traditionally
they've not been taken seriously
and so it's trying to address the
problem why
we routinely treat this particular group
of people that we call children
so differently to everyone else
and it's just received wisdom
false though it is
that these people are somehow
lesser than normal people
so we don't need to worry about
putting the word
children in there
or even people under 16 into david's
question so we can rephrase it without
any loss of meaning whatsoever to
how best to balance taking people
seriously and allowing people to have
drugs and surgical procedures even if
dangerous
that's the question it doesn't matter
what their age is and what you would do
if you care about these people in your
if you're in the life of someone who is
thinking about doing something dangerous
something with a risk
is you would advise them
this has come up recently of course for
many many reasons
but among others in the media people
have been talking about this idea of
people having surgical procedures to
change their gender
at the moment as human beings we are
confined to bodies
biological bodies i should say off into
the far distance
one day hopefully our minds can be
instantiated in something more robust
than what we happen to have now or a
version of this where once damaged can
be
easily and routinely repaired but we're
not in that situation right now
you break a limb older the older you get
the longer it's going to take to repair
and certain things that can happen to
you early on in life
can have a permanent effect for the rest
of your life
injuries to your spine injuries to your
brain and so on and so forth
so
there's no sense in which we're needing
to balance taking children seriously
with
allowing them to have drugs or to
undertake different surgical procedures
like anyone else we explain to them when
we take time
to help them understand what the risks
are
with
taking drugs and undergoing certain
medical procedures
the problem right now
with the issue as i see it
is that
as far as i understand it
doctors have neglected to do the right
thing in many cases by
advising people of the hazards
of some of these procedures
and that's wrong
that as jordan peterson has talked about
this
that a psychologist and a medical
professional
for so long hasn't been in the business
of affirming your problem
saying yes everything you think is
absolutely quite right but instead
the professional's role is supposed to
help you navigate the problem to come to
an understanding of what the solution
might be
rather than saying oh
you've picked a particular solution
absolutely let me help you enact that
it's not
not taking them seriously by saying hmm
there might be some errors in your
thinking let's explore that before we go
down the road of
chopping off parts of your anatomy
before we do that let's consider
talking to people who've already had
that done
and seeing what they might say about
such a procedure perhaps you should join
the community first of people who both
think it's a good idea and others who
think it's a bad idea and you should
carefully consider not over a matter of
days weeks and months but perhaps years
now
this is a whole issue but i don't think
that it is
especially a problem for
people of a certain age
people of every age have problems where
if they
make the wrong decision
then that decision is going to impact
the remainder of their lives
the issue we have with younger people
and the younger you are is the less you
know
and as compassionate concerned wise or
older people
we should
want to help them understand
and understand
the good and the bad
potential effects of any decision that
they make so
that would be my answer to that
i can see no one no one's um saying that
anything's going wrong with the audio so
i'm pushing forward in the hope that
everyone can hear me
benoit munir
asks
copy pasting my question i shared on
twitter in july
can i ask a question not sure how i'm
searching for my words he says
it's around design
the practice of design and science i'll
try with
how design is viewed as merging art and
science
in a framework
can it provide a good explanation
solution to a
human centered approach or problem
now i can't remember who asked a
question about
what design is or what the purpose of
design is or how to understand design in
i think a critical rationalist framework
it may have been you but in one of my
previous live streams this is live
stream number five now
i did answer a question about design i
said it's a design
the whole area of design something like
architecture is a really interesting
fusion between
art and science
it stands at the boundary between those
things allowing for imaginative
imagination which is completely
unbounded in the arts to some extent
and something like science where the
imagination is obviously constrained by
reality and here's design in the middle
where we can explore what physical
reality allows
and then
be as artistic as we like
i am a designer and i am no artist
so i can't give any advice on
um
how design viewed as merging art and
science can provide a human-centered
approach to problems
helpfully someone else has responded to
benoit's question and that's andrew and
andrew says
i thought about this too my thinking is
design is just knowledge about how
tailored something is to its
purpose problem situation
bad design has more error and is an
objectively worse solution hard to use
sounds terrible looks bad etcetera good
design is absent
much of the error presence neglected
design that is why it looks simple is
objectively better solution i think yeah
so fair enough
so if we're talking about what is a good
design and what is a bad design i would
leave that perhaps to others
certainly there's going to be a role for
in design two things as far as i can
tell form and function
does the design solve the problem that's
key but also does it do it in an
aesthetically pleasing way
and there is obviously a grayscale there
and different people will have different
opinions on that although of course
here
what we say is there are objective
standards to
form there are objective standards to
aesthetics and beauty and we can solve
the problem of
what stuff looks better
not merely solves the problem but solves
the problem in a more pleasing way
moving on
a question from vish and this is um far
more
in my wheelhouse so
thank you divish
and this is
hey brett i've been thinking about the
two types of universality that david
talks about
there's software universality
the creativity program and then there's
hardware universality
one
david only proved quantum computers are
universal not classical ones
so why should i even believe in the
existence of a universal classical
computer
okay so the answer to that is that's
incorrect
the reason that it's incorrect is
because
in the repertoire of quantum computers
is the capacity to emulate to simulate
the behavior of
a classical computer as well so a
quantum computer can do anything a
classical computer can do
classic computers what universal means
is that
anything that is computable can be
computed by
that computer
the repertoire of classical computer
what is a classical computer a classical
computer is something that uses binary
digits rather than qubits is one way of
looking at things
in fact a classical computer can compute
anything that's physically computable
including anything that a quantum
computer can compute
just not always efficiently
which means yeah some of the problems
are intractable
something as simple as
using a classical computer
to try and
simulate the behavior of let's say
the electrons in orbit around the
uranium atom uranium nucleus rather
is going to be something
beyond the capabilities of the most
powerful supercomputer that we have here
on planet earth it's going to take
you know pick a number
millions of years in order to calculate
the positions and
momenta of those electrons
10 seconds from now
but a quantum computer could do
something like that in fact
that's why a quantum computer is so
powerful because it can
model the behavior of quantum objects
well
efficiently
so i don't think that it's true to say
that david
only proved that quantum computers are
universal and not classical ones
the thing is that
once you have this concept of a quantum
computer
as i say
within its repertoire is anything that
can be physically built
it can compute
simulate
create a virtual reality rendering of
any physical object any physical object
from atoms
through to solar systems galaxies
people in theory and anything in between
and that includes
classical computers
and reflexively the classical computer
can
in theory
calculate anything that the quantum
computer can do just very many much more
slowly
because it has to do things sequentially
whereas the quantum computer has this
massive parallelism capacity where it
can compute many many things
simultaneously
and find out the
optimal solution in some cases out of
all of these different calculations we
won't get into
computation right now but yes that would
be my answer to that but question two
from this is even then how do we know
the brain is universal and not just a
glorified non-universal computer like a
calculator or a washing machine chip
what it takes for something to be
universal
in terms of computation
is very very minimal
our brains run a certain kind of
software which we argue is a universal
explainer
which means it can explain anything
that happens out there in physical
reality
and the
argument for that is simply a denial of
the fact that if there existed such a
thing that
couldn't be explained by us
that was inherently by us inexplicable
then that's an appeal to the
supernatural that says there's something
that cannot be explained and there have
been many versions of this inexplicable
thing over time god was i suppose one of
the first
this thing that is just so
beyond the capacity of human beings to
understand that it is literally
inexplicable
and explicit inexplicable
and today you know people who don't
believe in god
just shift from god to
the laws of physics the ultimate laws of
physics or something like that they
might be inexplicable inexplicable
inaccessible to us in some way shape or
form because they're beyond our capacity
to understand
but understanding is just a kind of
computation
how do we know the brain is a classical
computer
here's one way i like to think about it
and there would be alternative answers
to this
one way of thinking about it is
we can emulate
a classical computer
what do you need to do to emulate a
classical computer or you emulate a
turing machine what is a turing machine
a turing machine
all it is is a strip of paper in theory
infinitely long
that can
read and write symbols on a piece of
paper and move the read head
left and right is required erasing and
then writing these symbols on pieces of
paper all computation
classically reduces to this
that's what a class that's what
classical computers reduce to
the capacity to read symbols
erase them
replace them
and move along
and the reason it does that is because
it's following some instruction set
you can do that i can do that any human
being can do that they can follow that
set of instructions
so the software that runs upon our brain
can emulate
the action of any classical computer
fundamentally what the classical
computer does
so therefore the hardware on which that
software runs must itself the universal
because it's capable of doing
what the hardware of any classical
computer can do
yeah so the um
when i was
first grappling with trying to
understand quantum computation at
university i remember myself
laboring under the misconception i
thought ah there's quantum computer
stuff so therefore it has a
greater repertoire of computations that
it can do for a long time i sort of
thought that
misconception it doesn't have a greater
repertoire it's just that for some tasks
it's stupendously faster the quantum
computer is stupendously faster why
because it's got a different way of
computing stuff a different mode of
computation
it's not just
reading symbols on paper and then
deleting the symbol and putting a new
one there and doing that sequentially
one after another no it's able to
combine the results of many simultaneous
computations
together using interference and
entanglement in order to accomplish what
it does
okay so that's the answer to vicious
question i hope
hi brett from andrew
you have spoken many times how
widespread bad epistemology is in
academia public intellectual circles
and how it leads to dogma misconceptions
and the slowing down of progress
do you have ideas about what can be done
to promote good epistemology there if so
what are they and how would you like to
see
them improve on the current system
well
i guess
the bad epistemology that appears in
academia is just one of the many issues
with
academia i would say
the entire academic structure is set up
in such a way as to
hark back to
a kind of epistemology a kind of
learning and a way of organizing
organizations that itself is
authoritarian
the very notion of having a ranking
system
implies that
there are people who have the special
knowledge the guardians of the truth if
you like
and the rest of us
naval ravikant has called it a
priesthood and i think
that's a good way of thinking about it
there are great virtues to the
university and i enjoyed my time at the
university and i think the universities
have
much to be said in their favor
they serve an important function still
however
like many corporations
but worse
they resemble a priesthood in the sense
that
well you've got a pope don't you
the vice chancellor or the chancellor
you then have
the cardinals perhaps
the amateurist professors or the full
professors
the bishops
the associate professors the lecturers
and the priests the lecturers and tutors
and so on
and then the lay people the students
and perhaps the rest of the public who
listen to what the universities say
and the vowels point in saying things
like well you know academia is kind of a
priesthood in many ways it's because
within
the culture of academia as it exists
right now
many people are only listened to
to the extent that they possess the
qualifications and the titles
now
not in academic conferences by the way
and david deutsch has made this point
many times that
and i think sam harris and various
others
if you go to an academic conference
and you listen to people
deliver their findings from their
research for the first time
you're as likely to see arrogance and
haughtiness
from the top professor standing at the
front
telling the assembled audience about
their
new findings
about what the results from the large
hadron collider were
or the latest pictures from the james
webb space telescope
or
my new theory of string theory or
name your subject area
when the professor is delivering this
for the first time you're as likely to
see arrogance
and dismissal of questions as you are to
see nudity
in other words you're not going to see
that
everyone is on an equal footing
the
undergraduate who has an interesting
question during that conference can
raise their hand and ask a question and
if they're dismissed
by the professor
a world expert in his field everyone
will see that and everyone will realize
the professor doesn't have the answer
and that's a criticism of whatever they
happen to be saying
everyone's on an equal footing there
at the conference
during the lecture
during the delivery of the paper
however
once we move outside of that
and we're talking about
the public arena
then the rules kind of change
the situation is different
the media's treatment and the public's
treatment of the expert class
really is
still
like a
priesthood and you are
deferred to for your opinion to the
extent that you have
tenure at a university
a long list of publications after your
name
books to your name
many students who
follow in your footsteps and promote
your work
and defend your ideas
it's then
it's then that the irrationality begins
to come in because then what are we
doing
we're no longer relying upon a
critical way of trying to come to a
deeper understanding about
reality
but instead deferring to the person with
the greatest authority
designated as such
because
they have the most experience
the most number of qualifications
the longest list of research papers
behind them
any one of these things that people tend
to say
indicate the person with the answers
so that
that's one thing
if your organization
academia
is mired in this idea that
one has to look up
to the person with
who is best credentialed
then of course that bleeds into the
epistemology and the epistemology that
is taught and so there's going to be
motivated reasoning to a large extent
in philosophy departments and elsewhere
that what we should be teaching our
students
is that
what everyone should be doing is
listening to the experts
uncritically to some extent now they can
talk about critical thinking
all day long
but if what it comes down to is
we should
trust in the experts
and believe
their pronouncements about the future or
anything else
then we've got a problem now how would i
go about changing that in academia
i don't know
and the only thing i've been able to
suggest recently is that
for many many reasons because of this
these difficulties in academia
which include not only
deference to the authority of experts
but also
a certain kind of new indoctrination
that is appearing that may have always
been there i know when i was at
university beginning in the 90s
this kind of
woke post-modern relativist thinking
was already there it was nascent
beginning it had probably been there
since
at least the 60s just growing and
getting worse
people beginning to
think that
things like science were nothing but a
series of narratives stories and
fictions that we tell ourselves
none of which connect directly to
reality
this began to come out of the
universities and suddenly i heard a lot
of it when i was there it's only gotten
worse
worse to the extent that
what's called critical theory in
universities is of course
a perversion of
actual critical thinking
it's
turned criticism in on itself and said
criticism itself
is a problem
that to criticize an idea is to be
disrespectful of certain people a
certain class of people and so some
ideas should be held immune from
criticism
a complete anathema to an organization
ostensibly devoted to the project of
learning and knowledge creation
so we've got that problem
how would i change it i wouldn't so
what i've been suggesting and i think
many people have been suggesting is i'm
certainly not unique in this regard
there are many
um
great people on social media talking
about this
we just need an alternative if people
want to go to university and follow the
traditional path that's absolutely great
and fine and as i say the
serve an important purpose but if only
and increasing this is becoming true
we had alternatives for young smart
people
different ways
of
learning
not merely the subject matter they're
interested in but also ways of thinking
about that subject matter
where
they would
voluntarily in an open-ended way
learn about
epistemology physics biology anything
they like
without following a fixed curriculum
and by doing that having this popular
understanding of learning
i think that
after a few years of success of
something like this would you get a
credential at the end i don't know
passing through this system i wouldn't
call it a university system
some sort of mentorship
um
people
with far more capacity to enact change
than i
uh working on these things to some
extent
and as far as i'm aware already large
corporations are
less and less focused on
the credential
and the institution from which people
are graduating and instead focused on
things like
can you do the job are you creative are
you a little bit of an out of the box
thinker
never mind you know
your bachelor's or your master's degree
who cares
how would you solve this problem
and so i think we might be moving
towards that and we can see the
universities are
reacting in many ways people talk about
the
lowering of standards i have no problem
with allowing whoever wants to go to
university into the university but of
course it does have this effect
that
if
the people most interested passionate
and
capable
because they're most interested and
passionate
in things like and i'll just name the
area that i know about physics
if they're most interested in the
physical sciences of any sort and
passionate about it and therefore most
capable in those areas are looking at
the universities seeing what the
universities are offering
and coming to think to themselves do i
really want to spend three four
five six seven years of my life
following this very rigid
curriculum
at the end of which i gain a certificate
which will allow me to
do what an apprenticeship under a
an established physicist and then and
only then will i be able to do the
research and contribute to finding out
something new
is this what
the university experience is going to be
like traditionally this is
what it's been like i think many uh many
universities are trying to be a little
bit more innovative
trying to allow new undergraduates
people straight out of school to
contribute to something like
fundamental research as they should i
say always should it
but instead university of course has
just been an extension of school to a
large extent
so
so i would like to see the universities
improve
in precisely that way when it comes to
something like science allowing the
students rather than sitting in lectures
and tutorials
working alongside
the accomplished physicists scientists
you know graduate students working on
actual research
teaching them how it's actually done
not telling you know the the prospective
um
researcher at the age of 17 18 has just
come out of school is really passionate
about quantum computation
rather than telling them
well first you've got to sit through
two years worth of lectures day after
day after day on
linear algebra and advanced calculus and
you know the
classical mechanics and
all of this stuff learning to program in
python
whatever it happens to be
rather than doing that
let's take you straight to the lab where
the quantum computation stuff is being
done
where you can shadow the researcher and
ask them questions
of course the researcher might say yeah
they're getting in the way but
maybe there's some way of uh
hiring people who are
happy to do both the research and
assisting the
young upstart who really wants to
contribute
i don't know that's happening many
places but hopefully one day soon
that kind of thing a kind of thing can
happen
and
people will be extremely passionate then
coming out of school and wanting to get
into a science course of some kind
where from day one
they're working alongside people who are
doing the science rather than just
learning
you know
the history of science essentially
let's get going
[Music]
so i think i think i'm saying that
rather than
changing the existing system
which is like
trying to turn the ocean liner around
when it's at full speed
having an alternative
providing passengers with speed boats
that can do something completely
different let the people stay on the
ocean liner going off into their
direction there's a there's a reason for
that there's a reason for the old
traditional system
there's absolutely no reason why the
university system
shouldn't have
competition
for
nurturing the best and brightest
teaching the best and brightest and
helping the best and brightest
do something different
there we go
andrew has another question
his question is not a specific question
but have you listened to the discussion
between lex friedman and john carmack no
i haven't
they talk about john's push into agi
research it's a full-time pursuit much
of his thinking is optimistic about agi
being possible
well not only should he be optimistic
that's possible but
there's no need to be optimistic on this
it just it is possible
one
one can be optimistic about how soon
it's going to happen
but it is possible
because we exist
uh agi being possible on other
substrates and achievable in the near
term well even giving probabilities of
55 to 60 by 2030. so i just
yeah
just on that point i think people will
know if you've been listening to the
podcast recently what i'll say about
that there's no need to say something
like this i think that
i agree with david deutsche that a lot
of that kind of talk is just a scam it's
an interesting way to make money i've
said this before
that if you want to get
if you want to get um media attention
let's say
then talking in terms of probabilities
seems to really help
you say things like
um well there are prominent
intellectuals let's not mention names
who
quite happily go out there routinely
saying things like
there is a 95 chance that within the
next
50 years
ai will
take over the world
and so we need to prepare for this
because it's 95 to 95 chance
i'm a professor of philosophy at oxford
university no one ever asks where the 95
percent comes from nobody asks how this
they might say something like well
we had a prior probability and we took
into account certain evidence given the
trends in recent production of silicon
chips over in south korea and anyway our
bayesian reasoning has led us to this
number of 95 percent they'll probably
tell you a story about that
the fact is i know that i've been
researching this earlier recently
because i've been trying to get to the
bottom of where do these numbers come
from
and here's the answer
subject matter experts it's their
opinion they pluck the numbers
out of their ass they they just make it
up
but because they're subject matter
experts we place
great stock in their ability to
come up with a precise number
and it's just not true i don't care
if you're a professor or an engineer
or the world's richest person
just because you say
that there's a 50 chance of this
happening or a 95 chance of this thing
happening
within the next x number of years
it's no better than the person on the
street that i ask for their best guess
you can't
know
the distant future
when it involves the knowledge yet to be
created yet because that's inherently
unpredictable
better to say things like look this
thing is possible we're working towards
it who knows what's going to happen
could there be a disaster yes they could
when we've got no clue
but hey
it is a risk so maybe we should start
preparing for it i think that's the kind
of conversation that people should have
but instead you know
because it sounds more exciting to say
the thing is going to happen within the
next 50 years or 20 years or 10 years
that's exciting
and it sounds scientific
mathematically precise to put a number
on it even if the number's completely
made up you sound very erudite
it's a 96.4 chance
that within
23 years
the next pandemic will happen
because we've looked at past trends you
know that kind of thing you know
pandemics happen this often
but when the next pandemic happens
its severity will depend upon
the knowledge we've created over the
next number of years about how to deal
with viruses and things
how to
more quickly mass produce
vaccines
how to go about doing other stuff
masking and distancing or whatever else
we might invent in the future
i was listening to um
will mccaskill talking to sam harris
let's not go down the road of all the
disagreements i had there there was
another
uh
a wonderful exposition of
mainstream pessimistic thinking but one
thing that you know they did talk about
and touched upon was will mccaskill
talking about you know
uv light of a certain kind uvc light
that
might be able to be ubiquitous harmless
to people
but deadly to viruses
and if you could put this in places in
buildings all around the world
this could be a great way an absolutely
wonderful way of
destroying viruses that might otherwise
cause pandemics or certainly slow the
rate at which they can cause damage
yeah that's just one thing
so it's very difficult to predict
anything in the future even if we've got
so-called trends in the past
data about the past
the past does not resemble the future
i'm sorry andrew let me just continue
with your um question here
so this fellow um
john
carmack
john carmack
um
andrew says of him
he's optimistic about agi but he
entirely dismisses the moral
implications of personhood consciousness
qualia etc as deutsche and himself talk
about in relation to agi john is a
brilliant engineer and can make genuine
contributions but they will be
without much thought to the potential
moral implications of his work
and some references thank you andrew and
excuse me just while i have
a drink of my milkshake here
i don't know john mccarmack
i don't know him
but i'll just say this
if you think
ago if your conception of agi
is that it can be divorced from
personhood consciousness and qualia
then i just think
on my understanding of agi
that you don't understand agi you don't
know what it is
agi is just a term for
a person
that hasn't evolved by the means of
evolution by natural selection
we can imagine alien life out there
somewhere else in the universe
it won't be agi
but it will be gi it will be general
intelligence it will be a person
as we are
people agi is just a person
who
has been
created by
already existing people
using technology
that has to be possible it has to be
possible to
emulate
general intelligence because we have it
because we have it it's physically
possible if it's physically possible
then we can do it
if we know how
that's the whole problems are soluble
thing
the only difference between a problem
being solved or not is knowing how
so i'm just afraid to say
that
this idea
of dismissing the moral implications
of agi
is a terrible moral failing
it's wrong to do that and this is why
some of us are concerned
to some extent about the project of agi
now i'm not that concerned
right now i don't think it's an urgent
problem because i don't see anything on
the horizon that suggests that agi is
around the corner
that we're just a few more incremental
steps we're going to be there but let's
say
let's say we lived in a world where
someone had a
good explanation
that they could create agi
in a computer
my feeling right now but they could
evolve it in some way let's say you
could simulate a virtual universe
and in that virtual universe inside of
the
computer with sufficient memory and
processing speed and all that
you can have
galaxies and in those galaxies of stars
and around those stars for planets and
on those planets were environments that
allowed for
life to evolve
and you could you could you could rig it
so that
intelligent life would evolve would you
do it
many of us would say no that would be
abhorrent you shouldn't do it now why
well effectively you're performing an
experiment which brings into existence
untold
suffering that didn't need to be there
yeah sure some of those people that
evolve in that virtual world might go on
to have great lives
but that doesn't matter
because what's also going to happen is
lots and lots of suffering unless you
can
rig it in such a way that there's not
suffering but then you've got this
problem then you've got this problem and
this is what i would be concerned about
if you had agi in a simulation
is that the right thing to do would be
to
tell those people in the simulation that
they're in a simulation
they're not seeing that they're real
people
but the world they occupy
is not made of
atoms it's running on a computer
and for them that would be a terrifying
thought because what if something goes
wrong with the computer and it switches
off then they vanish and disappear
so
that's the kind of thing that i would be
worried about if it was possible but
we're so far away from anything like
that that we don't need
to be concerned about answering that
question right now
but this is also why
related to this is even if you could
have a cyborg that exists in our world
with a physical body that could have
artificial general intelligence
would i then want to create that i think
there are just many many questions we
need to answer morally before going down
that road one of which is if you did
really create the person like that
would that person
be happy
that they've been created with a body
such they can't interact with the rest
of humanity all the other people on
planet earth
or be treated in the same way
let's face it they would be
freakish they'll be different they'll be
unusual and they might not want to be
they might want to go off and you know
do poetry and have a family but they
can't
they can't
maybe they can create other little agis
but
they're going to be brought up in a
culture a culture where everyone else is
biological
so we need to kind of solve this kind of
problem
now of course it could very well be the
case that
as david deutsch says if you if you're
at the point where you've got the
technology to create an agi made out of
silicon you can make the cyborg thing
then presumably you understand the
program
for a mind for creating a mind and so
maybe you also have the technology where
you can scan a person's physical brain
biological brain and stick that into a
cyborg as well
maybe vice versa
maybe you've also got the technology to
genetically engineer a body
with a brain but no mind and you can
stick an artificial
general intelligence into that we're in
the realm of science fiction right now
so
um these are interesting moral questions
i think they need to be answered we have
to understand
um
many things before
many many things morally before we
actually solve the problem of agi but as
i say
although i think it's possible i see no
signs whatsoever
that
we're anywhere near
or anywhere close i think that david
deutsch's
paper that he wrote on this
i guess close to a decade ago about how
agi is possible
but
um
we're not there yet
it's as true today as it was then i
don't think there's been progress made
i've been trying to follow some
of what's out there about this
and
almost all versions of it except for a
few people within the community of um
critical rationalism there's some people
there that are working on agi via
property perspective but they are a very
very very small minority
the overwhelming number of people
think that learning occurs
via some
method of
bayesian reasoning
and so that's a dead end we know that's
a dead end because inductions are dead
end and
that's not how knowledge is created
therefore it's not how learning can
possibly happen
so that can't possibly be a solution to
this question of agi
um now i'm interested in agi i don't
think it's a particularly urgent problem
um
i'm happy with incremental increases
fast but incremental increases in plain
old ai i think that's fun
um
but in the distant future yeah um
agi is going to be a thing and it's also
going to make these just on a related
point it's also going to make moot
all of these concerns that people have
very bright people
including the world's richest man
people
very worried about population collapse
i don't think this is an issue
i'm not worried about
this precisely because i think that
before all biological life is
extinguished on earth i think we'll
probably solve that we'll solve that
problem of agi
and so once we do that you know
once we solve aging is another issue if
you solve aging you don't have to worry
about a population collapse right
because everyone just continues to live
indefinitely so it's not like you need
to replace people because no one's dying
or almost no one's dying
the population will only ever increase
but many many people are animated right
now that
that the trends in population growth are
going in a direction they don't like and
they're concerned about the species
of human beings um declining in number
we're not declining a number yet
we're not declining a number yet we're
still increasing
it's still an exponential increase
um
the rate of increase is decreasing in
many many places
certainly in the western world
but why people are so animated and
concerned about this i don't really
understand
the problem is death
more than a lack of birth
if we can solve the problem of death
and decay and decline and all that sort
of stuff which are real problems
then we don't need to worry about how
many more people are being born i would
love it if lots more people are being
born of course because
i think people are
creativity instantiated they are
literally
little universes of creativity the more
of them the better
let's have more people
but although i think that's a wonderful
thing i also don't think it's a problem
if people choose willingly not to have
more children
it's up to them
yeah and then
the the bigger problem is
let's keep these
individual little universes people
living longer and healthier that's the
urgent problem
um next question from michael jacobson
again happily
more in my wheelhouse again
he asks
question one when explaining the many
worlds interpretation i can't recollect
hearing you elaborate on why the
branches or histories of the multiverse
or whatever is the correct definition
would interfere with each other
is that because there is currently no
theory for that
well
what's doing the interfering
in these situations are
individual particles
so
individual particles interfere with
themselves and so effectively that's
what we're talking about when we're
talking about universes it's a
the use of the word universe
when it comes to discussions of quantum
theory
can be misleading because what people
tend to envision
is
a thing like our universe this
13.7 billion-year-old thing
that
extends off you know billions of light
years in all directions this big solid
block thing that happens to exist
that contains all the galaxies
so they imagine that
and they imagine the multiverse is that
but just lots of them
that's not quite right although
there is that
there is our universe and then lots of
versions of that universe
and there are other universes
if you look at the work of someone like
david wallace who wrote the emergent
multiverse you know
whenever an interference experiment is
done
you've got
little universes being created
differentiating and then recombining
a quantum computer inside of a
functioning quantum computer
are many many universes
coming into being
differentiating combining
but in terms of physical science they're
as small as what the quantum computer is
so long as they are isolated from
the rest of physical reality
because if they're not then decoherence
happens and the
quantum computer stops doing what it's
doing stops being effectively able to do
what it's doing
then you've got these universes
contained within this little space
so
to talk about
the many worlds interpretation
as being
a thing where whole universes or
branches or histories are interfering
with each other
can be misleading
the interference is going on between
particles now why well it's simply
because for any individual particle
there are instances of that particle and
the instances of that particle is think
of the twin slit
experiment take all possible paths that
can be taken to all physically possible
things that that thing can do
and under that condition
can sometimes interfere with each other
because that's just what happens now you
might say well that's unsatisfactory
that that's just what happens but
to use a phrase from wittgenstein
your spade is turned sometimes you get
to the bedrock of what we understand
so to an extent i would agree with you
that
maybe there's currently no theory for
that it's kind of like if you ask me the
question
and this is a question
now sometimes i still struggle with
myself
you ask
why do two negatively charged particles
repel one another
take
two electrons they repel
they're not attracted
they repel one another you bring them
closer and closer they repel more and
more strongly now
feynman's answer to this
and
the quantum chromodynamics answer to
this quantum theory's answer to this is
each electron
emits photons
and so because they emit photons as you
bring them closer and closer together
then they're repelling because photons
have momentum
that cause them to move apart
so this this electron is going over here
and it's emitting photons and this
electron isn't emitting photons that way
and so they push each other apart
why are they emitting photons
well then we get quantum field theory
and that gets beyond me but eventually
you get to a point where you go that's
just what happens
that's just what happens
why when you cool water below its
freezing point does it turn into a solid
well because the little water molecules
are shaped like boomerangs and they
arrange themselves such to say
you know the positive part attracts a
negative part why does the positive part
attract the negative part
well again we come back to electrons
doing something
it reminds me a little of feynman
himself being asked this question you
know
famously there's a great youtube um
video i think the reporter asking him
you know when you put two north poles of
a magnet together they repel one another
why
confinement says what do you mean why
that's what they do they repel one
another
and the reporter or the the person
interviewing fireman
actually gets a little bit upset he gets
a little bit angry and he sort of says
to firemen i find you know words the
effect or something or other like you
know i find you're being a little bit
obtuse i don't understand why you're
just not answering me
without giving me a simple answer
and you know i can't remember exactly
what fireman's response is but basically
the idea is well
that question goes really really deep
you know
this is why people
have spent years doing physics to try
and understand this stuff and so you
having not studied physics for years and
years and years
come
with a certain amount of background
knowledge richard fined and has a
certain amount of background knowledge
which is vast
but if he goes into trying to explain
quantum field theory to you
as a starting point
you're just going to ask more and more
questions why why and it's legitimate
it's legitimate but
pushed for time
and you just want a succinct answer all
we can say is that's what they do
so to hear
why should interference happen
at all
it does
because
particles exist in multiple instances
and because they exist in multiple
instances
sometimes
they those instances may not be at the
same place at the same time
but there is an opportunity for them to
come together to be in the same place at
the same time again and they carry
momentum and they can bump each other
out of the way there can be physical
collisions between these instances they
can recombine or not
and this process is
something like interference
why do particles exist in multiple
instances
there we go again
interference is a tough one
because
it's trying to explain using particles
what people have traditionally
understood
something that only waves do okay why is
it's rather trivial to explain why waves
interfere with one another
the the
the concept of superposition with waves
with the wave theory of of light among
other things is easy and so
people still you know even when teaching
quantum theory will
speak in terms of waves that's why we
talk about wave particle duality
two waves that meet when their crests
combine
increase their amplitude
but when a crest meets a trough
the amplitudes cancel out
so that intuitively people kind of get
that form of interference these waves
interfering with one another
but the analog
in particles which is what is really
going on what's really going on when
you've got light is not light waves
although the wave theory of light is
easier to understand and appreciate what
you've actually got going on is photons
particles of light
coming together
and
either reinforcing each other or
canceling each other out now how does
that happen well there we go quantum
theory um
for what it's worth there is my series
on youtube about
the multiverse there i think it's got
five
episodes many many hours worth
and i do try and explain there in some
detail some of these experiments which
involve
interference phenomena
following
what's in the beginning of infinity
the idea of fungibility
and following
what is in the fabric of reality which
is certainly where
i was persuaded for the first time that
this is how you understand this stuff
this many worlds interpretation
the multiverse
question two however
from mikhail is if the branches
interfere with each other
they should also affect other histories
does this mean our choices in our branch
affect other branches
um
this concept of branching is sometimes
used
when
certain people explain
the multiverse they endorse
this many worlds interpretation this
multiverse idea
but they talk of splitting and branching
and so on and so forth
what's actually happening is
differentiation now you might say
so universes that are the same identical
in all respects
fungible is the word that is used
these universes exist and so you right
now and the universe we are all in
sharing
there are many many identical instances
of it
and
in a very real way you are all of those
identical instances right now
as is the rest of the universe
but every single moment
the things are happening
that cause
all of those instances to differentiate
well those universes are differentiating
to different versions and so you can
call that branching if you like
now to those
the question is do those branches
interfere with each other yes they can
go off and you know there can be other
kinds of interference
it's not just our universe it's doing
the branching and the interfering
there's nothing special about us there
are other observers in other universes
this is the problem it's one of the
problems
that
the many world's interpretation
everything
quantum theory solves
there's no special place for the
observer
the observer obeys the same laws of
physics as every other physical system
so if it's possible for there to be two
versions of the electron
two versions of the universe it's
possible for there to be and there
really are
two versions of the observer
now your consciousness and how your
consciousness relates to that is an open
question why are you conscious of this
particular
version but not that one that just
differentiated right now
well
that we don't know we don't know what
consciousness is we can't pose the
problem
precisely
one day we'll know
i don't think it's a special problem i
was convinced there for a while this is
an especially difficult problem it's
especially difficult to
put the problem i suppose but there are
many such problems like this
you know
are there a set of laws of physics that
constrain what the laws of physics are
that we know and is there a meta set of
laws of physics
is there a point worrying about this
what sets the
the values of the constants of nature or
the strengths of
these are interesting questions but
sometimes they're difficult to pose
okay
next question question three from
michael
i am confused by your rejection of
current mainstream reasoning regarding
theory
what is the downside of current
mainstream thinking
and what is the upside of your way of
looking at possible outcomes
i think there might be a missing word in
mikhail's question there i'm confused by
your current
by your rejection of current mainstream
reasoning regarding theory
what theory
um
okay so
uh is it quantum theory mainstream
reasoning regarding quantum theory
because it's following from questions
already on quantum theory i don't know
um but let's just deal with the second
part of the question
what is the downside of current
mainstream thinking and what is the
upside of your way of looking at
possible outcomes maybe it means
probability that's what i've been
talking about a lot recently
okay it's not my way of looking at
things most of the time i'm drawing on a
number of people
you know
primarily
karl popper and david deutsch
um
what is the downside of current
mainstream thinking well just broadly
speaking i've already talked about this
so we'll just check this off as
i think one of the main
two main issues that i've been focused
on recently one is
deference to authority
so therefore an uncritical attitude to
any area of knowledge
from
policy making through to morality and
science
uh history
all that sort of stuff people relying on
authorities that's one thing and
probabilistic thinking on the other now
my series on pinker's book rationality
is trying to go into
it's becoming increasingly
an assessment of
what passes for
mainstream thinking is the question
there says
now
i can't put a number on it there's no
percentage but there's a lot of course
there is a lot in mainstream ways of
thinking academia intellectual culture
that's absolutely fine
because
only through
trial and error and
the the the encounters with reality that
experts have had over time
have these methods of thinking
improved
on what went
for
you know intellectual thinking in the
past in the past the deference to
authority was
far worse than what it is today today
it's a much better version
in the past it literally was just do as
you're told in the tribe
you're a member of the tribe but you're
not the chief and you're not the
medicine man
do what you're told
we have direct access to the gods and
the truth you'll do as you're told now
we've moved on from that
but we inherit
some of that we inherit um quite a bit
of this
style of engaging with each other and
with reality
that there are certain people who are
kind of like we treat us kind of like
portals to reality
scientists are one such
scientists are a certain kind of expert
with knowledge
and we should value
and respect people with
expertise and knowledge
but
this does not mean that you should give
up your own critical thinking faculties
and
effectively outsource them
to someone else
you yourself should be critical and have
a good explanation as to why any
particular expert
is themselves a good critical thinker
that that that should be the attitude
that people typically have
so
my concern about mainstream thinking is
there seems to have been
well
i think it's just been more obvious over
the last few years
it seems like
two things have happened
and they haven't been for the good
one is
one side of politics has
been
talking about what the experts say
more and more and more
and talking about expert consensus
and holding up the science
and in which is not a good thing not not
a good thing to have an uncritical
attitude of thinking that the science
has settled and that there is a class of
people the experts who have
special insight into things like how the
future is going to unfold
i think that's wrong i think it's bad
i think it's a misstep
and one measure of it being a step is
there has been a reaction
as equally unreasonable
which is to turn around and say
we reject all expertise and none of it
can be trusted and it's a great
conspiracy
and
you should
you know go to this website where the
truth is
both of these attitudes are wrong and
they're feeding on each other one side
is saying look at those fools over there
they don't trust the experts
and that side is saying look at those
fools over there
there are a bunch of sheep being led by
the experts the so-called experts
there's a middle ground here there's a
third way
there's
the capacity to admit that there is a
thing called expertise
and we can admit that the experts should
tell us their best explanations and
explain it however long it takes
by whatever means it takes from as many
angles as it takes
explain precisely what your position is
why you have that position what you
think is going to happen and allow us
to come to our own judgment about things
we shouldn't dismiss the experts out of
hand because
to some people it seems as though they
are all
engaged in some great cover-up
and that there's some sort of
political bias there might be
but the only way of being able to
uncover
bias
errors in general
is for people to be very explicit
about what they know and how they've
come to know it
and in recent years it's been a real
problem that
there's a class of people who haven't
even bothered to worry about the
explanations that instead what they say
is aha here's professor so-and-so and
professor so-and-so is saying that this
is the biggest problem that we have and
here's the solution and anyone who
disagrees is disagreeing with the
science with the expert
never having heard or been given the
opportunity to hear the explanation
and sometimes worse the expert
pretending they have an explanation when
they don't pretending to know things
they don't know and therefore
undermining
the expert class
which i think is a terrible thing i
think that
in certain areas
some scientists
and other experts have been their own
worst enemy
they don't need to overreach and again
this comes back to this probabilistic
thinking i've been talking about so much
recently
that experts can it's anti-rational they
can shield themselves from criticism by
saying by couching things in terms of
probabilities because if you say
there's an 85 chance of this disaster
happening
and the disaster doesn't happen
as invariably it doesn't you can turn
around and say well i never said for
sure it was going to happen 85 percent
means 85 percent there was a 15 chance
it wouldn't happen so i'm still right
they're always right probabilistic
thinkers can always be right they can't
be refuted because things either happen
or they don't
and this has been a problem
this
bayesian reasoning
is
hurting
domains of expertise it's hurting
scientists
it's hurting scientists because it's
causing them to speak extremely
confidently
but at the same time having an out
by quoting a percentage which isn't 100
instead what they should be saying is
this is the best known explanation
this is what we understand right now we
could be wrong
but if we're not wrong this terrible
thing is going to happen
we should take it seriously right now
we can always be wrong anything could be
wrong we need to be fallibilists but
being a fallibilist is not
saying that we don't take our best known
theory seriously at any given point
quite the opposite
it's saying that we could be wrong but
we've got nothing else to rely upon
right now it's either rely upon our best
theory
or rely upon a not best theory or no
theory at all
we need to act we need to decide
but when people don't
give explanations
instead say something like
as
amateurist professor of
whatever
i am telling you there is a 72 percent
chance that within the next 10 years
this terrible thing is going to happen
give my foundation 450 million dollars
government
and then the thing doesn't happen people
are right to be very skeptical about
that expert
and unfortunately that subject area and
it should never have been that way
so there is
error on all sides there's error on the
side of the experts not explaining
themselves well
of couching
the way in which they speak
in an overconfident way using bad
epistemology like bayesian reasoning
relying upon so-called trends of the
past
being consistently pessimistic
pessimistic profits
and as we say here
prophecy
claiming to know what the future holds
always has a bias towards pessimism
because
it's
far easier to imagine into existence the
terrible tragedy
but not the solution the explanation
which will solve that problem in time
often not by the expert by someone else
by some entrepreneur or business person
who's
seeking to
solve the problem make a profit make
everyone's life better
so that's another thing
okay next to the next question
the next question is from finn
but what i'm going to do is i'm just
going to take a
one minute break
to get some water which i've neglected
to bring myself and i shall return with
finn's question finn's written
written a bit of an essay so
i don't know if i can get through all of
it and then if there are any questions
on
the chat and on twitter i'll i'll come
back and do that as well so bear with me
so
[Music]
okay
finn asks
bear with me
he says hey brett
here's the theory of everything would
love to see a video of your take on it
now finn i apologize i'm not going to be
able to get through
all of this
um
uh i skim read it
earlier
and
my broad take on this is that
diverse theories from different areas
can sometimes inform one another
but we have to be careful to
apply
the best theory for a given problem
situation
rather than see
parallels via analogy between different
things which i think might be what's
going on here
so finn
says
um and he's
i
because finn's a patreon i will read
through his
things
and finally get to i think there's a
question at the heart of this he says
sam harrison mindfulness guides on his
waking up app talk about how we can't
control thoughts or feelings popping up
and we find peace of mind and truly
being mindful when we are simply letting
our mind do what it's already doing and
not grasp it as certain states one may
even experience a loss of self or non
duality or feeling of connectedness to a
consciousness greater than themselves if
you're doing it right
side question real quick would you say
you have experienced this experience yet
yes or no
yes this concept of selflessness is well
known in mindfulness and meditation and
that kind of thing
the purpose of mindfulness i would say
naval
hits the nail on the head
as close as anyone as far as i can tell
which is
that what you're after
is
freedom from mind sometimes
that's what we're after
not all the time i mean
the overwhelming majority of my waking
hours are about
engaging in
fun joyful happy problems
thinking and reading and talking and
all that sort of stuff and so that's not
freedom from mind
but
when people are in distress and when
people are stressed out and when people
have anxiety and depression all that
sort of stuff what you want is freedom
from that you want freedom from your
mind because they're just thoughts
and if you can get that if you can get
that state then you are relieved
now of course if you can replace that
with a happy and joyful state
so much the better
but yes so
a lot of people have had the experience
it's well known i think people make a
lot of it i don't understand why it's
just an experience it's just an
experience to have the experience of
selflessness
of divesting
this sense you have that you are
yourself now
where i differ with other people who
engage in these kind of practices is
that
i'm not an empiricist
so
and i think maybe you come to this or
someone else maybe just ask someone else
on twitter
a question i've been asked hundreds of
times literally
isn't there one thing you can be sure of
that you are conscious that you exist
no
just because you're having an experience
doesn't mean
necessarily
you know what's going on
you know the nature of that experience
that's empiricism empiricism is the idea
that you derive knowledge from
experience from observations
that's true in the physical world when
you're looking at my trope example of
stars at night and you're seeing them
twinkle
and you go well
what i'm observing what i'm experiencing
are
tiny cold pinpricks of light
but that's not knowledge that doesn't
tell you what you
know stars actually are what we know
stars are are
huge furnaces burning
via fusion power
hydrogen and into helium in many many
cases
you don't get that just by looking at
stars
the idea that you do is empiricism
that's why empiricism is wrong so much
of what we know
is explaining what we see in terms of
stuff we don't see
knowledge doesn't
come via the senses that the purpose of
the senses is to decide between to
provide the observations that decide
between the theories we've already
guessed
that's true of the rest of physical
reality and it's true of your own mind
as well
it's true of your own mind as well i
know this is hard for people to accept
but get over it
when you look at the table
you don't see atoms but you know they're
there
as much as you feel the table and i can
feel the table here right now
feeling it over and over again
never gets me one jot closer to feeling
an atom because it is beyond the
capacity of my senses
my sense of touch
so when people are apt to say that they
have experiences while meditating
that give them
certain insight into particular
knowledge all i can say is
why have you changed the epistemological
rules
we know that having an exp having an
experience is no guarantee
that you've got
access to the truth about reality
you have to interpret what the
experience means
now
this question of oh
can't you be sure
that
when you're conscious that you
exist so much is contained within that
statement
what is conscious meant
what what does sure mean
what does putting these words together
into the sentence
i am sure that i'm conscious right now
me
once you admit once you say yes to that
oh yes that's the one thing you can be
sure of
well then you're also admitting that
there is such a thing as certainty or
surety okay
let's say you you know the way it's
usually put is
there's one thing you can be certain of
you can be certain you exist okay let's
say you say yes to that yes that's the
one thing you'll be certain but doesn't
that entail that there exists also in
addition to that claim
there exists something called certainty
it does
doesn't it also entail that
the letters
c e r t a i n
label this concept of certainty with
absolute certainty after all if there's
an error anywhere there if there's a
mistake and you're thinking that that's
this set of characters label this word
certain which means cannot be mistaken
about and that applies to your existence
and your consciousness suddenly what i'm
saying is you're not just certain of
this one thing
you're certain of a whole raft of things
entailed by that and i reject that
i rejected the concept of certainty it's
just a feeling
you can be an error
what i would say is
i don't know what consciousness is
i don't think certainty is a thing
i think it's superfluous to our needs
and instead
when someone says isn't there one thing
you can be certain of that you exist
my response is
no but i know i exist
i know i exist
i don't think i'm mistaken about being
about my existence
can you doubt your existence
well i suppose so maybe
maybe i've just come into being and i'm
about to go out of existence now and i
already go into existence you know a
boltzmann brain or something
something ridiculous
i don't need to be certain i don't need
this why
does it matter
do you know why it matters to people
because they want a foundation
they want somewhere to start
they want this solid foundation so they
can then build
and therefore derive
the rest of the edifice of knowledge
this was descartes great project and
some people haven't moved on
as if papa never existed
we don't need certainty
so
i've experienced this experience of not
having a self
fear
now
finn goes on to
make some claims about
what meditation entails
um
about it providing a greater sense of
peace after you've meditated
um
it can provide a solution to a problem
you might have been working on
um
it might provide you with
a new and interesting idea oh yeah i
agree with all that you know people who
quiet in their mind
um in any way shape or form can
tend to
become more creative can find the
solution to the problem that's been
plaguing them okay we all agree
he then says now here's the kicker what
if the process happening during
meditation when one is connected to more
of consciousness than just their mind or
body
is quantum entanglement with the parts
of consciousness with
which they feel connected to
this could mean momentary connection or
entanglement on the small scale
connection between a person's mind body
and a piece of clay when they are in a
meditative state or creating pottery or
potentially a momentary sense of
entanglement on the grand scale of
connection to all life on earth and
matter in the multiverse or someone is
in a deep state of meditation
so what i want to say about this is that
it is
uh
it has the same feel and theme to
many many
yogis and mystics and the various other
people who try to draw parallels between
some stuff that's true about quantum
theory
and then some stuff that's true about
meditation and subjective experience
and i just don't think it's necessary i
think that you can
have all of the good stuff that
meditation provides
without ever worrying about
what its connection to physics is maybe
one day we'll have a good explanation
but
it's almost like to me
meditation is can be a valuable
experience for people
just as riding a roller coaster can
but the fun of riding a roller coaster
is not
really enhanced i would say
by having a deep knowledge of
the laws of physics
the laws of physics mandate everything
that happens
it can help to explain certain things
that happen
but they can also be utterly irrelevant
to whatever you happen to be doing
you can be a great surfer without ever
understanding
fluid dynamics and can have fun while
surfing or swimming without
knowing about the chemistry of water
so too here now
could meditation have something to do
with quantum entanglement
i mean it could
but
there's a couple of reasons why i would
say it's extremely unlikely one reason
is just at a technical level is that
quantum entanglement
is
this idea where you can have
two different things two different atoms
acting as if they're one essentially
being the one system they're entangled
now the way that occurs and the way that
can be set up in the laboratory
my understanding is and i may be wrong
there may have been
advances since i last looked into this
the quantum entanglement is important in
things like quantum computation
very important
models of entanglement
physical model actual existing
demonstrations of quantum entanglement
happen for individual particles or pairs
of particles or groups of particles
when the temperature is exceedingly low
why
because you need the system to be
isolated from the rest of physical
reality and thermal energy heat the
vibration of other matter around
can cause decoherence
can cause whatever information is
contained within that system which is so
entangled
to leak out into the rest of the world
losing the entanglement destroying the
entanglement so
the brain the human mind the brain
is a very hot place in comparison to
near absolute zero which is where
quantum entangled systems happen to be
now
smart engineers are working on this and
they need to work on this in order to
realize a proper quantum computer and
they might very well yeah they keep on
increasing the temperature at which
superconductivity works for example it
used to be that you know
superconductors were all sort of
pure metals like
copper
cooled to you know minus 270 degrees
celsius or something like that
near zero kelvin a few degrees of above
absolute kelvin pure metals
they were the first kind of
superconductors i think
but then gradually over time smart
materials scientists began to invent
things ceramics and other kinds of
things where the temperature didn't have
to be near absolute zero still very cold
but
maybe
you know certainly
well within the temperature range of
liquid nitrogen
okay which is only like minus whatever
degrees celsius or something like that
and very cheap so you can have
superconductivity at a considerably
higher temperature than absolute zero or
near absolute zero
so hopefully one day you know the
progress is happening you know
it
unless we discover new physical laws
we will have superconductivity at room
temperature that'll solve a whole bunch
of
problems with energy
and quantum computation will be
happening at room temperature as well
perhaps
or certainly much higher you know
functioning quantum computers
happening at a much higher temperature
other than what they what
present
experimental versions of them uh are
operating at the most experimental
versions i'm aware of
that seem legit uh operating at very low
temperatures i say legit because
it was just a story i think i retweeted
yesterday
again
one of these claims
that come out
it's at the moment quantum computation
is
so much of the industry seems mired in
speculation exaggeration and hype which
is really unfortunate
but there's a lot of because there's a
lot of money out there
governments are engaged in providing
people with
funding
to try and build the first quantum
computer and so a lot of people are
trying to pull the wool over people's
eyes
i would suggest
by saying they've got something that's
like a quantum computer
and yet again a
an article came out and this has been
happening
sort of periodically
over the last decade i remember this
thing called d-wave i think this was
another example
d-wave was this computer that was
claimed to be a quantum computer at
first it was claimed to be a quantum
computer
google i think bought it
they claimed they had a functioning
quantum computer and a lot of us were
saying wow that's amazing
given we were trying to follow progress
in the engineering of actual quantum
computers
around the corner from where i live not
far in my city
university of new south wales has a
center for quantum computation i try and
follow
what they're up to and what they're
doing and how much progress they're
making and they're making progress but
it's exceedingly slow and they're not
able to do much and so i've kind of got
an idea of
what the real people who are publishing
stuff in actual journals where you can
go and check the results
where they're at
and you know they can you know they're
using like
two or three qubits
single atoms or a couple of phosphorous
atoms
using the spin of these phosphorous
spin of the electrons and these
phosphorous atoms to do stuff
it's not much
it's impressive but
it's not like they're ready to make
desktop versions of these things and yet
companies like d-wave come out and say
we've got a fully functioning quantum
computer
and then a couple of months or years go
by and then they kind of admit well it's
not quite a quantum computer
it's kind of got quantum things with it
but we've got quantum supremacy and what
quantum supremacy is
is
i've never really understood it but the
claim is
that quantum supremacy is
a demonstration
of
a
calculation or bit of software or
something like that but a calculation or
a computation
that is done in a certain amount of time
which would be impossible to do by any
classical
computer once you can do that you've got
quantum supremacy
and i've never understood this because
i've always thought
well doesn't that just come down to the
programming
and and if you really were
if you really did have this quantum
computer why aren't you just telling us
what the plan is of the quantum computer
this is where you get this real tension
between
the free and open
publication of knowledge that
traditionally has happened in science
with
the commercial indus interests of
industry this is tension the same thing
happens of course in the pharmaceutical
industry
wouldn't it be better if
all the pharmacologists around the world
just shared openly
their
plans for different medicines and trials
and everything was just open source well
they don't want to do that because
they're investing lots of money in
trying to make the next best medicine
and they don't want the competition to
find out the recipe
so they can't publish it they have to
keep it secret test it
and so on and so forth so there's this
problem which
on the one hand is
good for trying to have the best people
work on these important problems as fast
as possible but bad on the other hand
because it doesn't allow them to
collaborate i don't know how to solve
that problem and i think everyone's got
to solution that problem the same thing
is true in this quantum computation room
lots of people are working in with very
diverse different
ways of trying to
build a quantum computer a functioning
chronic computer but many of them are
not sharing their ideas they're keeping
them very close to their chest
because if they do make a breakthrough
they want to be the first have copyright
and then sell it for you know untold
billions of dollars
great very well
more power to them but unfortunately
that very thing could be slowing them
down because
person over here and person over there
and person over there if only they could
combine their knowledge they're working
for all different companies would get to
the solution faster
maybe
but because of the system
as it is
now there's a lot of
perverse incentives as people say
of research
groups
saying they've made a breakthrough
producing um
you know
glossy pamphlets
on their quantum computer their latest
quantum computer
uh
and saying it has achieved quantum
supremacy
and so yeah i retweeted an article i
can't remember the details but yeah it
was
just a case of where
another research group
said of the first research group
they didn't achieve quantum supremacy
here's our program running on a normal
classical computer that outperforms your
supposed
quantum supremacy thing so you never had
quantum supremacy in the first place
and by the way you know if someone does
demonstrate quantum supremacy aren't all
they are doing
is just beating any existing computer
which any computer of the future quantum
or not is going to do anyway so there's
a lot of it's a lot of black box stuff
yeah so
this is the practical application of
entanglement i don't think we need to go
into
entanglement can also explain
what's going on during meditation
i think you can have your meditation
without needing to worry about
whether it's connected to
quantum theory or not
okay and so um finn goes on
to say
although he says
the reason it could be
what's going on during meditation
reason it could be quantum entanglement
is because you could be connected to
some part of consciousness broader than
your mind and the body and so you could
be in an entanglement with some part of
consciousness broader than your body and
mind since consciousness is
part of the multiverse
you could be an entanglement with some
part of the multiverse broader than your
body and mind
how can you test if this is true
well finn i don't know but this is your
theory so you would have to come up with
a test of that
explanation
who knows how the creativity of the
human mind works
people have suggested that
the brain is doing something quantum
this is why it's so special and
different
we can't rule it out
we have no good explanation that it is
who knows how creativity works perhaps
there's something
involving interference going on at the
level of the neurons i don't know
no one has a good explanation it's
interesting to speculate but at the
moment all we have is just
uh
complete nut of speculation
many of us guess that
the human brain
is running a mind and all of it is
basically classical
that's all you need i mean
and one reason why i say again this is
not a knockdown argument is because
hitherto or models of
experimental quantum computers require
entanglement to have an entanglement
sense to happen at low temperatures
where the noise is reduced
and the brain is a very noisy
environment now that that again that's
just based upon
current understandings which is all that
can go on as current understandings it
might very well be that next year
someone figures out a way of
maintaining entanglement inside systems
that are operating at room temperature
or higher
just as they seem to be able to do
with
well not quite but as has been the
progress with superconductivity
superconductivity the temperature just
keeps on rising and rising i don't know
what the latest is but yeah they
continue to improve
um
okay so i'll just skip down
because
thank you finn but you did write a lot
um
finn all i can say is you could be right
he he suggests that maybe thinking
has something to do with
um cubits when you're in a state of
meditation you're in a superposition
where parts of the multiverse this this
all could
be the case
um
so i'm just going to skip past that i
don't know no one knows how the mind
works and if you did have a theory of
exactly how creativity in the human mind
works if you had such a theory
then it would be incumbent upon you it's
incumbent upon the theorizer of a
purported scientific theory to
demonstrate how it's scientific and the
way you do that is by also coming up
with the experimental test which can be
very hard you know to think of
how one might go about testing your
particular theory
but if you want to be taken seriously as
a
scientist
the even as a theoretician it's
important for the theoretician to at
least
in principle say how their theory could
be tested you don't have to get into the
nuts and bolts of what precise equipment
you would use but just to say how it
might be tested excuse me again
um
okay finn moves on to another question
series of questions um
he says are black holes parts of the
universe in which a person by david
deutsch's definition of a person which
i'd say could include all people in
animals and atoms and light on earth is
in a state of singularity with the space
and time in which it extends to
the david deutscher's explanation of a
person is that we are universal
explainers that is the new
and i would say most advanced
understanding hit the two
of
what a person is it's been a mystery
that has plagued philosophers for
ever since there's been philosophy
as to what makes a person different and
i think a lot of people have come to
this via different
angles
and they said well people are the only
things with morality we're the only ones
that care about each other unlike other
animals
we're the only ones that can create
poetry and music and art
these kind of answers are all orbiting
the deeper fundamental explanation which
is about explanations
and david says
what we are and what a person is whether
alien artificial general intelligence or
human being
is that
we are universally explainers anything
that can be explained
which is every phenomena in physical
reality can in principle be explained by
us not right now that's our whole
purpose is to try and create these
explanations but nothing is beyond our
capacity to understand hence we're
universal explainers that's what a
person is
and nothing else counts as a person
but that's our best understanding now
is that
a
definition i didn't say it's a
definition because that would mean that
somehow there's a finality to it but we
don't know how
explanations are generated we know that
we do it and in order to be a person you
have to be something that can generate
explanations
exactly what it is that people do in
creating explanations we don't know
that's an open question
[Music]
many more questions i'm skipping finn to
just perhaps someone to answer
he asks is the universe expanding at an
ever increasing rate because black holes
are ever increasing the rate at which
they become singularized with their
surroundings
no
the universe is expanding at an ever
increasing rate for reasons we do not
know we call the problem dark energy
something is driving the expansion of
the universe and we don't know what it
is
the amount of energy in any fixed volume
of space
remains constant
this is why hence the term dark energy
it's like where is this extra energy
coming from because if the universe is
expanding the energy density of the
universe should be going down because
there's an increased volume and you have
to spread this energy over a greater
volume but that's not what's happening
the universe the energy density
universes remain constant
um
okay
so i i think i'll end it there finn finn
feel free to contact me again via
patreon or some other method and we can
have a perhaps private conversation
about the rest of that now
having said all of that stuff about
from patreon
let me now
go to any questions that happen to have
been asked
on
um the
chat over here which i haven't been
paying attention to
vicky has asked what are your thoughts
on human biases which lead us humans to
irrational decisions
[Music]
i follow in
the steps of david deutsche in saying
that a bias is
just a word people have invented for
a certain kind of error
i think the mistake that people make
bias if you will
that people who talk about biases
is that they think that it is some
inherent
problem with people
that people are subject
people are prone to just continually
make these mistakes but
once a bias has been pointed out to
someone they error correct it's just an
error it's just a mistake
and so
people aren't
people are plagued with errors
but that's the necessary state
of
being a creative person the only way of
being creative is to
conjecture
guests
something
and
more often than not you're going to be
wrong
you're going to make a mistake
now
some people tend to
not correct particular errors which
itself is an error and repeatedly not
correcting a particular error
some people diagnose that and give that
the label bias
so
you know
um
i yeah i i don't i don't think it makes
people
especially irrational
at all
um
you know there could be some good biases
in the world but
parents are rightly biased
in favor of their children
now does that make them irrational
i don't think so i think it makes them
perfectly rational but
it's a good bias right you should
want to spend
more of your income on your own children
than on some stranger
it's the right thing to do
that's the way in which society and
families cohere
and progress happens and problems are
sold and people are nurtured and so on
and so forth
i think that's quite right
so
i i don't call that irrational i call
that rational so not all biases are
indications of irrationality
and those ones that are
indications of irrationality are again
just mistakes just errors
that
one might make
um
yeah so
people write books and books on on
unbiases and
[Music]
what they call them logical fallacies
and that kind of thing
and it's all just
different kind of errors that people
have put labels on
my series on pinker's book rationality
goes into this to some extent
and i get worried about it because
as i've been trying to explain there
it it it does tend to create and this
again goes to
the issue i was talking about earlier
about how sometimes experts are their
own worst enemy they're not doing
themselves favors
because
if you have this concept of
logical fallacies and you'll be a
critical thinker or a good thinker or a
rational person if only you learn the
list of logical fallacies and the biases
that people are prone to and if you
learn these things then you're one of
the rational people you're one of the
good people
but everyone else
those ignoramuses the plebeians out
there the uneducated and unwashed
well you know
of course we
luckily are here to help them because we
are less prone to error we understand
the logical fallacies we are not so
prone to
us the experts the intellectual class
this is the sense in which even if they
don't explicitly say this
this is the sense in which they're not
doing themselves favors because they can
come across that way
you know there's something to be said
for
a certain level of modesty
papa
was absolutely right insane
while differing widely in the little
bits and pieces that we do know we are
all
equal in our infinite
ignorance we are all equal and infinite
ignorance
i have all the people that need to know
that
is the intellectual class
the academics and the experts that they
need that lesson more than the average
person
more than the average person
i would say
because they tend to forget
that
the little bits of knowledge they do
have the bits of expertise that they do
have does not make them less prone to
error
in fact if you want to talk about bias
and error
that is repeatedly made then it's the
bias of the intellectual at times
presuming to know best
perhaps especially about their own area
of expertise at times
because
having an area of expertise
makes you sometimes uncritical
makes you a little bit too comfortable
in knowing what you know
it's good to have the crank and the
skeptic and the lay person out there
questioning coming along and say i don't
agree with you
and it's wrong to try and silence them
it's wrong to say you're an irrational
person prone to bias
i'm an expert how dare you
this is the attitude
this is a very religious type way of
thinking
that the priest is the one
who is only capable of properly reading
the bible and understanding the mind of
god
the scientist the only one capable of
understanding the book of nature
this mistake this error
we need to guard against it we need to
remember that we're all equal in our
infinite ignorance and when
someone appears to be irrational making
wrong decisions patience
kindness
carefully explaining one's position
explaining one's position
not
insisting that you know what the future
holds and that you
have some special ability to predict
what the future holds
okay
next um
question uh
um
remy has said perhaps what i'm asking of
the schooling system is something
decentralized decentralized science
absolutely yes yes totally
totally on board with that
um
and and and of course this is one of the
great things about
the free market and what the free market
actually solves
if you have
a focus on
[Music]
government funded
research
well we could spend i could spend an
entire another how long have i been
going for now two hours it's been
another two hours talking precisely
about this problem i won't
but the issue is that
if you're handing out tax money for the
purpose of research then quite rightly
the taxpayers and the politicians
want to know where it's going and
precisely why
they want to know what problem you're
solving by doing your research
but the thing is with fundamental
science
that you don't necessarily know
what the end point is going to be
all you know is
that
you don't know what the answer to this
question is you don't have an operating
theory but
you need a little bit of time therefore
you need a little bit of funding
in order to
come up with some suggestions
quite rightly quite rightly
taxpayers
going to work
nine to five
bringing up families
earning
the bare minimum
paying off their loans
struggling these days with inflation to
get the basics the grocery store
quite rightly
they would think
why is my tax money going to
this group of people at this university
over here
if they can't even say
what they're going to do what the
solution is going to be
so again there's this tension but this
does not arise
to some extent to some large extent
in the private sector
because in the private sector you can
have the generous benefactor the
philanthropist the person who says i
recognize
your potential genius your creativity
here
i'm sponsoring you for the next five or
ten years
go for your life do your best now
there's no guarantee that at the end of
that
this
scientist or research group is actually
going to produce the goods there's no
guarantee there are no guarantees in
life
but the philanthropist the wealthy
person the the the corporation perhaps
who has some
good ideas about how to
help foster fundamental science
then they're going to
assist in the flourishing of the
creation of knowledge in that way
in a way that i think
it would be unfair it is unfair
for people
grinding away at much more boring jobs
don't have the opportunity to do
yet but one day
one day we'll all be working on creative
stuff great but we're not there yet
and so for that reason i think that
where we can
government funding should be replaced by
private institutions now at the moment
we're not there yet and i would say that
that any such transition it's not
happening anyway so
what's the point of worrying about it if
anything
government funding of science is only
increasing
i'm not a dictator i have no power
whatsoever
even if i did it would be an incremental
decrease in the other direction
i think that
what universities and government funded
research institutions doing right now is
great for the most part wonderful
do i think large hadron collider should
have been built yes
do i think the hubble space telescope
and the james webb telescope should have
been put up there with government
funding
yes
why because
at the moment there is no
private institution willing to do this
but
if they weren't paying so much in taxes
maybe they would maybe they would and
this has been my argument about that
kind of thing for a long time
that generosity would absolutely
flourish
if people were
able
financially from corporations through
individuals to be more generous but they
can't be because
so many are struggling to make ends meet
corporations are struggling
to make just enough profit to keep
themselves in existence
individuals are struggling to make just
enough income
to
pay the bills so they can't be generous
everyone's paying so much
tax
that's that
um
let's see
jojo monster
quadruple seven has asked are you
generally interested in spreading your
ideas for example if a big live stream
with
5.9 k viewers 440 000 subs wanted to
interview you would you be up for that
or do not care about that well of course
i like in in talking to people and i do
talk to people i talk to
people all the time about this kind of
stuff
um
uh
it's it's not that i
tend to turn people
down who ask
uh to talk to me
but i've done it on occasion only
because
i think that
well
perhaps our interests aren't the same
kind of thing
a lot of people like to talk
politics and political stuff and
contemporary issues and while that's all
very good
and i can engage in that stuff
for now
i see my role as
well doing what i do and then that takes
up a
heck of a lot of time i'm in the midst
of editing
yet more episodes on
my series on the fabric of reality which
is what i actually love doing i think
it's really important that these ideas
do get out there so yes of course
interested in spreading my ideas
uh um
pratap
singh has started more episodes coming
with naval what i'll say on that is just
stay tuned
stay tuned on that
a little bit um
a little cryptic
um
yeah i think that's it i think we're
down to all the questions um oh
christian dean
asks
true or false
intelligence is not
greater or lesser cognitive superiority
true or false intelligence is not a
but rather specific knowledge about how
to pass the social test we call
intelligence articulate read behavior
yes absolutely i agree with you
christian entirely i've written
spoken about this reasonably extensively
on my blog and
channel podcast so on and so forth
what i admit
to the psychologists and to various
others
who are absolutely dogmatically
committed to the idea that
iq is a thing
and intelligence differences are real
is that it can be predictive
of course it can be predictive
of course it could be predictive
anything could be predictive
but that doesn't mean it's explanatory
now if you perform well on a particular
test you have to ask why
why did you perform well on this iq test
now
on the account of new certain
neuroscientists and psychologists
it's because of genetic differences
between people
but
i i just don't i just
if that's not the case because of
explanatory universality
people are all equal in their infinite
ignorance people are all equal in their
capacity to explain stuff
intelligence
on my worldview is a black and white
thing it's not a gray scale
knowledge content is a grey scale people
can know more or less stuff and the more
stuff you know
the better you'll perform on iq tests
and that's all there is to it
i would say
now
people deny this and they say no no it's
genetic you know we
can we can show that it's inherited and
that's a whole other story but
i agree with
the underlying assumption of christian's
question there it's specific knowledge
and you can practice you can practice
the style of questions that are asked in
iq tests
and improve
your genetics won't have changed but
your performance on the test will have
changed
because you've learned more
maybe there are some questions on
twitter i might not have gotten to so
just to
finally
um
get through everything there
jiten has asked she's another great
supporter of the podcast
what are your thoughts on what addiction
is why do gamblers people using drugs
etc need help with
addiction
um
i think that i accept what
the neuroscientists and psychologists
tend to say on this that there are two
kinds of addiction
there would be
a chemical kind of addiction and there
will be a psychological kind of
addiction the chemical kind of addiction
is
where
you've been consuming a particular
chemical for
some time
alcohol
heroin whatever
and
by virtue of repeatedly ingesting that
particular chemical it has physically
altered the chemistry of your brain
it has replaced
the usual functioning of
neurotransmitters
so that if you were to suddenly take
away the alcohol
then
the neurotransmitters that were
hit the two being provided and
stimulated by the alcohol are no longer
present
and that could cause death because now
your brain which controls the rest of
your body is no longer functioning
in just the same way so that's a
physical form of addiction and it will
be felt as a compulsion to
consume alcohol or to take the drug
whatever it happens to be and so that is
a
genuine
physical
addiction a medical issue
and it has a good explanation behind it
then there is the other kind of
addiction which is the psychological
addiction where
uh and i think many people
many more people i would say likely have
this which is a form of
thinking you need the thing in order to
get through the day or through life or
whatever
uh again alcohol i think
possibly a lot of people are
psychologically addicted to alcohol but
if you took away their alcohol it's not
like they're suddenly going to collapse
and have seizures
because their brain chemistry has been
mucked up so badly
but rather they feel as though they
won't be able to enjoy life without it
and so they continue to go back to it
again and again and again
just because it
feels good and they they are under the
alert the mistake they have the mistake
that they're carrying around it
which is
i can't enjoy myself without this thing
i need to have this thing or life won't
be fun which is just an error
which is just an error now it might be
true that for
the next few days they won't know how to
have fun this is true in social
situations certain people will always
have alcohol in social situations
they simply don't know how
to participate in social situations
without the alcohol or better
don't know how to have fun in social
situations without the alcohol
so that can be a form of psychological
addiction so that's i'm not adding
anything there to what i think is well
known in the scientific literature
why do they need help well people know
that for two reasons one the first kind
the physical kind is because it's a
medical issue
and so there needs to be a way of
weaning people off and i think that is a
problem with a well-known solution
in the case of alcoholism slowly
tapering away the alcohol and replacing
it with the other medications which
themselves are gradually reduced until
you're back to normal and you're dry or
sober or whatever it happens to be
why do other people who are
psychologically addicted because you
don't know how it's like anything else
um people need help with let's say
gambling is a good example
why do they need why do you know because
you don't know how to enjoy life or move
through life without doing that thing
it's like why why do some people need
help
um
going to the gym
and exercising
well some people just don't know how
don't know how to get into a routine
this is the this is
psychology and counseling at its best i
spend a lot of my time uh criticizing
psychology
choir science as the science as an
explanation of how the mind works i
think they get a lot of that wrong but
at its best
psychology provides psychologists who
are
wise kind compassionate people who will
help talk you through your problems and
solve them help you in partnership with
you solve your problems and so that's
the case with gambling as well
um let's see
michael felber
thanks for the amazing work explaining
david deutscher's
and car
yeah i think that's um chiara maletto's
thinking how is david deutscher's
multiverse compatible with hard to very
explanations if already answered please
point me to the episode well i suppose i
can point you to again my series on the
multiverse
in
very brief
why is it hard to vary well
the way i typically explain it is well
if we just ignore the
experiments for the moment
there's only one way of explaining the
outcome of the experiments which is to
infer the existence of objects that we
cannot observe
there in the multiverse but to take the
equations of quantum theory
as literal descriptions of what's going
on
so in the same way as
kepler's
laws of orbital motion
imply the existence of orbits
so that when something like earth goes
around the sun
it only occupies a particular place
at a particular time
nonetheless the orbit is real because
all the other places at all the other
times really do exist
we've either already been there or yet
to get there
in the same side an orbit exists
we just take seriously what kepler's law
exists kepler's laws say
and we arrive at the conclusion and
orbit exists
in the same way there's something called
the schroedinger wave equation
which implies that
for any
object
take an electron
it
simultaneously occupies many different
positions okay many different velocities
has many different
um values for other physical
observables
but take position
the equations say it's literally in
multiple positions at the same time
but we only ever observe it at one
position in the same way that
the earth has only ever observed that
one position in its orbit even though
the orbit exists all the other positions
really do exist
well so too with the electron if the
equation says that it occupies all of
these places
simultaneously
then simultaneously it does occupy all
these positions that's the multiverse
but we only ever observe it in one place
so that's that's the hard to vary
explanation
and that's it that comes to the end of
uh
the ask me anything thank you to those
who tuned in for
part of
my little diatribe today and i think
i've set myself a new record at 2 hours
and 20 minutes
for anyone who did make it this far
tomorrow hopefully we'll have another
episode of
discussions of the fabric of reality
out
and two should come in fairly quick
succession because i've been
re-reading through some of poppa's old
material that comes to bear on
david's chapter seven a conversation
about justification so
that'll be the next episode that sounds
heavily focused on
some stuff that popper said about this
but until then i'll see everyone later
bye-bye